---
---

<dl class="glossary">
<dt id="abstract_syntax_tree" class="glossary">abstract syntax tree (AST)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A deeply nested data structure, or <g key="tree">tree</g>, that represents the structure of a program. For example, the AST might have a <g key="node">node</g> representing a <g key="while_loop"><code>while</code> loop</g> with one <g key="child_tree">child</g> representing the loop condition and another representing the <g key="loop_body">loop body</g>.</dd>
<dt id="actual_result" class="glossary">actual result (of test)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The value generated by running code in a test. If this matches the <g key="expected_result">expected result</g>, the test <g key="pass_test">passes</g>; if the two are different, the test <g key="fail_test">fails</g>.</dd>
<dt id="affordance" class="glossary">affordance</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A property of something that suggests how it can be used, such as a handle or button.</dd>
<dt id="anonymous_function" class="glossary">anonymous function</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A function that has not been assigned a name.  Anonymous functions are usually quite short, and are usually defined where they are used, e.g., as callbacks.</dd>
<dt id="assertion" class="glossary">assertion</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A <g key="boolean">Boolean</g> expression that must be true at a certain point in a program.  Assertions may be built into the language (e.g., <g key="python">Python</g>'s <code>assert</code> statement) or provided as functions (e.g., R's <code>stopifnot</code>). They are often used in testing, but are also put in <g key="production_code">production code</g> to check that it is behaving correctly.</dd>
<dt id="asynchronous" class="glossary">asynchronous</dt>
<dd class="glossary">Not happening at the same time. In programming, an asynchronous operation is one that runs independently of another, or that starts at one time and ends at another.</dd>
<dt id="automatic_variable" class="glossary">automatic variable</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A variable that is automatically given a value in a <g key="build_rule">build rule</g>.  For example, Make automatically assigns the name of a rule's <g key="build_target">target</g> to the automatic variable <code>$@</code>.  Automatic variables are frequently used when writing <g key="pattern_rule">pattern rules</g>.</dd>
<dt id="blob" class="glossary">binary large object (BLOB)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">Data that is stored in a database without being interpreted in any way, such as an audio file. The term is also now used to refer to data transferred over a network or stored in a <g key="version_control_system">version control</g> <g key="repository">repository</g> as uninterpreted bits.</dd>
<dt id="block_comment" class="glossary">block comment</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A <g key="comment">comment</g> that spans multiple lines. Block comments may be marked with special start and end symbols, like <code>/*</code> and <code>*/</code> in C and its descendents, or each line may be prefixed with a marker like <code>#</code>.</dd>
<dt id="boolean" class="glossary">Boolean</dt>
<dd class="glossary">Relating to a variable or data type that can have either a logical value of <g key="true">true</g> or a value of <g key="false">false</g>. Named for George Boole, a 19th Century mathemetician. Binary systems, like all computers are built on this foundation of systems of logical evaluations between states of true and false, 1 or 0.</dd>
<dt id="build_recipe" class="glossary">build recipe</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The part of a <g key="build_rule">build rule</g> that describes how to update something that has fallen out of date.</dd>
<dt id="build_rule" class="glossary">build rule</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A specification for a <g key="build_manager">build manager</g> that describes how some files depend on others and what to do if those files are out of date.</dd>
<dt id="build_target" class="glossary">build target</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The file(s) that a <g key="build_rule">build rule</g> will update if they are out of date compared to their <g key="dependency">dependencies</g>.</dd>
<dt id="cache" class="glossary">cache</dt>
<dd class="glossary">Something that stores copies of data so that future requests for it can be satisfied more quickly. The CPU in a computer uses a hardware cache to hold recently-accessed values; many programs rely on a software cache to reduce network traffic and latency. Figuring out when something in a cache is out of date and should be replaced is one of the <g key="two_hard_problems">two hard problems in computer science</g>.</dd>
<dt id="caching" class="glossary">caching</dt>
<dd class="glossary">To save a copy of some data in a local <g key="cache">cache</g> to make future access faster.</dd>
<dt id="callback" class="glossary">callback function</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A function A that is passed to another function B so that B can call it at some later point. Callbacks can be used <g key="synchronous">synchronously</g>, as in generic functions like <code>map</code> that invoke a callback function once for each element in a collection, or <g key="asynchronous">ascynrhonously</g>, as in a <g key="client">client</g> that runs a callback when a <g key="http_response">response</g> is received in answer to a <g key="http_request">request</g>.</dd>
<dt id="character_encoding" class="glossary">character encoding</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A specification of how characters are stored as bytes. The most commonly-used encoding today is <g key="utf_8">UTF-8</g>.</dd>
<dt id="class" class="glossary">class</dt>
<dd class="glossary">In <g key="oop">object-oriented programming</g>, a structure that combines data and operations (called <g key="method">methods</g>).  The program then uses a <g key="constructor">constructor</g> to create an <g key="object">object</g> with those properties and methods.  Programmers generally put generic or reusable behavior in <g key="parent_class">parent classes</g> and more detailed or specific behavior in <g key="child_class">child classes</g>.</dd>
<dt id="command_line_argument" class="glossary">command-line argument</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A filename or control flag given to a command-line program when it is run.</dd>
<dt id="console" class="glossary">console</dt>
<dd class="glossary">FIXME</dd>
<dt id="constructor" class="glossary">constructor</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A function that creates an <g key="object">object</g> of a particular <g key="class">class</g>.  In the <g key="s3">S3</g> object system, constructors are a convention rather than a requirement.</dd>
<dt id="cryptographic_hash_function" class="glossary">cryptographic hash function</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A <g key="hash_function">hash function</g> that produces an apparently-random value for any input.</dd>
<dt id="dependency" class="glossary">dependency</dt>
<dd class="glossary">See <g key="prerequisite">prerequisite</g>.</dd>
<dt id="design_pattern" class="glossary">design pattern</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A recurring pattern in software design that is specific enough to be worth naming, but not so specific that a single best implementation can be provided by a <g key="library">library</g>. For example, <g key="data_frame">data frames</g> and database <g key="table">tables</g> are instances of the same pattern.</dd>
<dt id="destructuring_assignment" class="glossary">destructuring assignment</dt>
<dd class="glossary">Unpacking values from data structures and assigning them to multiple variables in a single statement.</dd>
<dt id="dag" class="glossary">directed acyclic graph (DAG)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A <g key="directed_graph">directed graph</g> which does not contain any loops (i.e., it is not possible to reach a <g key="node">node</g> from itself by following edges).</dd>
<dt id="dom" class="glossary">Document Object Model (DOM)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A standard in-memory representation of <g key="html">HTML</g> and <g key="xml">XML</g>. Each <g key="element">element</g> is stored as a <g key="node">node</g> in a <g key="tree">tree</g> with a set of named <g key="attribute">attributes</g>; contained elements are <g key="child_tree">child nodes</g>. Modern programming languages provide many libraries for searching and modifying the DOM.</dd>
<dt id="dom_selector" class="glossary">DOM selector</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A pattern that identifies <g key="node">nodes</g> in a <g key="dom">DOM</g> <g key="tree">tree</g>. For example, <code>#alpha</code> matches nodes whose <code>id</code> <g key="attribute">attribute</g> is &quot;alpha&quot;, while <code>.beta</code> matches nodes whose <code>class</code> <g key="attribute">attribute</g> is &quot;beta&quot;.</dd>
<dt id="dynamic_loading" class="glossary">dynamic loading</dt>
<dd class="glossary">To <g key="import">import</g> a <g key="module">module</g> into the memory of a program while it is already running. Most <g key="interpreted_language">interpreted languages</g> use dynamic loading, and provide tools so that programs can find and load modules dynamically to configure themselves</dd>
<dt id="dynamic_lookup" class="glossary">dynamic lookup</dt>
<dd class="glossary">To find a function or a property of an <g key="object">object</g> by name while a program is running. For example, instead of getting a specific property of an object using <code>obj.name</code>, a program might use <code>obj[someVariable]</code>, where <code>someVariable</code> could hold <code>&quot;name&quot;</code> or some other property name.</dd>
<dt id="dynamic_scoping" class="glossary">dynamic scoping</dt>
<dd class="glossary">To find the value of a <g key="variable_program">variable</g> by looking at what is on the <g key="call_stack">call stack</g> at the moment the lookup is done. Almost all programming languages use <g key="lexical_scoping">lexical_scoping</g> instead, since it is more predictable.</dd>
<dt id="empty_element" class="glossary">empty element</dt>
<dd class="glossary">An <g key="element">element</g> of an <g key="html">HTML</g> or <g key="xml">XML</g> document that has no <g key="child_tree">children</g>. Empty elements can always be written as <code>&lt;name&gt;&lt;/name&gt;</code>, but may also be written using the shorthand notation <code>&lt;name/&gt;</code> (with a slash after the name inside the angle brackets).</dd>
<dt id="error_test" class="glossary">error (in a test)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">Signalled when something goes wrong in a <g key="unit_test">unit test</g> itself rather than in the system being tested. In this case, we do not know anything about the correctness of the system.</dd>
<dt id="exception" class="glossary">exception</dt>
<dd class="glossary">An object that stores information about an error or other unusual event in a program. One part of a program will create and <g key="raise_exception">raise an exception</g> to signal that something unexpected has happened; another part will <g key="catch_exception">catch</g> it.</dd>
<dt id="exception_handler" class="glossary">exception handler</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A piece of code that deals with an <g key="exception">exception</g> after it is <g key="catch_exception">caught</g>, e.g., by writing a <g key="log_message">log message</g> or retrying the operation that failed.</dd>
<dt id="expected_result" class="glossary">expected result (of test)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The value that a piece of software is suposed to produced when tested in a certain way, or the state in which it is supposed to leave the system.</dd>
<dt id="fail_test" class="glossary">fail (a test)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A test fails if the <g key="actual_result">actual result</g> does not match the <g key="expected_result">expected result</g>.</dd>
<dt id="filesystem" class="glossary">filesystem</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The part of the operating system that manages how files are stored and retrieved.  Also used to refer to all of those files and directories or the specific way they are stored (as in &quot;the Unix filesystem&quot;).</dd>
<dt id="filter" class="glossary">filter</dt>
<dd class="glossary">As a verb, to choose a set of <g key="record">records</g> (i.e., rows of a table) based on the values they contain. As a noun, a command-line program that reads lines of text from files or <g key="stdin">standard input</g>, performs some operation on them (such as filtering), and writes to a file or <g key="stdout">stdout</g>.</dd>
<dt id="fixture" class="glossary">fixture</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The thing on which a test is run, such as the parameters to the function being tested or the file being processed.</dd>
<dt id="generator_function" class="glossary">generator function</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A function whose state is automatically saved when it returns a value so that execution can be restarted. Generator functions are typically used to produce streams of values that can be processed by <g key="for_loop">for loops</g>.</dd>
<dt id="global_variable" class="glossary">global variable</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A variable defined outside any particular function, which is therefore visible to all functions.</dd>
<dt id="globbing" class="glossary">globbing</dt>
<dd class="glossary">To specify a set of filenames using a simplified form of <g key="regular_expression">regular expressions</g>, such as <code>*.dat</code> to mean &quot;all files whose names end in <code>.dat</code>&quot;. The name is derived from &quot;global&quot;.</dd>
<dt id="http_header" class="glossary">HTTP header</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A key-value pair at the top of an <g key="http">HTTP</g> <g key="http_request">request</g> or <g key="http_response">response</g> that carries additional information such as the user's preferred language or the length of the data being transferred.</dd>
<dt id="iterator_pattern" class="glossary">Iterator pattern</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A <g key="design_pattern">design pattern</g> in which a temporary object or <g key="generator_function">generator function</g> produces each value from a collection in turn for processing. This pattern hides the differences between different kinds of data structures so that everything can be processed using loops.</dd>
<dt id="json" class="glossary">JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A way to represent data by combining basic values like numbers and character strings in lists and name/value structures. The acronym stands for &quot;JavaScript Object Notation&quot;; unlike better-defined standards like <g key="xml">XML</g>, it is unencumbered by a syntax for comments or ways to define a <g key="schema">schema</g>.</dd>
<dt id="lexical_scoping" class="glossary">lexical scoping</dt>
<dd class="glossary">To look up the value associated with a name according to the textual structure of a program. Most programming languages use lexical scoping instead of <g key="dynamic_scoping">dynamic scoping</g> because the latter is less predictable.</dd>
<dt id="lifecycle" class="glossary">lifecycle</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The steps that something is allowed or required to go through. The lifecycle of an <g key="object">object</g> runs from its <g key="constructor">construction</g> through the operations it can or must perform before it is destroyed; the lifecycle of an <g key="issue">issue</g> may be &quot;created&quot;, &quot;assigned&quot;, &quot;in progress&quot;, &quot;ready for review&quot;, and &quot;completed&quot;.</dd>
<dt id="line_comment" class="glossary">line comment</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A <g key="comment">comment</g> in a program that spans part of a single line, as opposed to a <g key="block_comment">block comment</g> that may span multiple lines.</dd>
<dt id="linter" class="glossary">linter</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A program that checks for common problems in software, such as violations of indentation rules or variable naming conventions. The name comes from the first tool of its kind, called <code>lint</code>.</dd>
<dt id="log_message" class="glossary">log message</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A single entry in a <g key="log">log</g> of a program's execution. Log messages are usually highly structured so that data (such as the time or the severity) can be recovered later.</dd>
<dt id="method" class="glossary">method</dt>
<dd class="glossary">An implementation of a <g key="generic_function">generic function</g> that handles objects of a specific class.</dd>
<dt id="mime_type" class="glossary">MIME type</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A standard way to identify the contents of files on the internet. The term is an acronym of &quot;multi-purpose Internet mail extension&quot;, and MIME types are often identified by <g key="filename_extension">filename extensions</g>, such as <code>.png</code> for PNG-formatted images.</dd>
<dt id="mock_object" class="glossary">mock object</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A simplified replacement for part of a program whose behavior is easy to control and predict. Mock objects are used in <g key="unit_test">unit tests</g> to simulate databases, web services, and other complex systems.</dd>
<dt id="non_blocking_execution" class="glossary">non-blocking execution</dt>
<dd class="glossary">To allow a program to continue running while an operation is in progress. For example, many systems support non-blocking execution for file I/O so that the program can continue doing work while it waits for data to be read from or written to the <g key="filesystem">filesystem</g> (which is typically much slower than the CPU).</dd>
<dt id="pass_test" class="glossary">pass (a test)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A test passes if the <g key="actual_result">actual result</g> matches the <g key="expected_result">expected result</g>.</dd>
<dt id="path" class="glossary">path (in filesystem)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A string that specifies a location in a <g key="filesystem">filesystem</g>. In Unix, the directories in a path are joined using <code>/</code>.</dd>
<dt id="pattern_rule" class="glossary">pattern rule</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A generic <g key="build_rule">build rule</g> that describes how to update any file whose name matches a pattern. Pattern rules often use <g key="automatic_variable">automatic variables</g> to represent the actual filenames.</dd>
<dt id="promisification" class="glossary">promisification</dt>
<dd class="glossary">FIXME</dd>
<dt id="protocol" class="glossary">protocol</dt>
<dd class="glossary">Any standard specifying how two pieces of software interact. A network protocol such as <g key="http">HTTP</g> defines the messages that <g key="client">clients</g> and <g key="server">servers</g> exchange on the World-Wide Web; <g key="oop">object-oriented</g> programs often define protocols for interactions between <g key="object">objects</g> of different <g key="class">classes</g>.</dd>
<dt id="query_string" class="glossary">query string</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The portion of a <g key="url">URL</g> after the quesiton mark <code>?</code> that specifies extra parameters for the <g key="http_request">HTTP request</g> as name-value pairs.</dd>
<dt id="sandbox" class="glossary">sandbox</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A testing environment that is separate from the production system, or an environment that is only allowed to perform a restricted set of operations for security reasons.</dd>
<dt id="search_path" class="glossary">search path</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The list of directories that a program searches to find something. For example, the Unix <g key="shell">shell</g> uses the search path stored in the <code>PATH</code> variable when trying to find a program given its name.</dd>
<dt id="side_effect" class="glossary">side effect</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A change made by a function while it runs that is visible after the function finishes, such as modifying a <g key="global_variable">global variable</g> or writing to a file. Side effects make programs harder for people to understand, since the effects are not necessarily clear where the function is called.</dd>
<dt id="single_threaded" class="glossary">single-threaded</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A model of program execution in which only one thing can happen at a time. Single-threaded execution is easier for people to understand but less efficient than <g key="multi_threaded">multi-threaded</g> execution.</dd>
<dt id="singleton_pattern" class="glossary">Singleton pattern</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A <g key="design_pattern">design pattern</g> that creates a <g key="singleton">singleton</g> object to manage some resource or service, such as a database or <g key="cache">cache</g>.  In <g key="oop">object-oriented programming</g>, the pattern is usually implemented by hiding the <g key="constructor">constructor</g> of the class in some way so that it can only be called once.</dd>
<dt id="stack_frame" class="glossary">stack frame</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A section of the <g key="call_stack">call stack</g> that records details of a single call to a specific function.</dd>
<dt id="build_stale" class="glossary">stale (in build)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">To be out of date compared to a <g key="prerequisite">prerequisite</g>.  A <g key="build_manager">build manager</g>'s job is to find and update things that are stale.</dd>
<dt id="stream" class="glossary">stream</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A sequential flow of data, such as the bits arriving across a network connection or the bytes read from a file.</dd>
<dt id="string_interpolation" class="glossary">string interpolation</dt>
<dd class="glossary">The process of inserting text corresponding to specified values into a string, usually to make output human-readable.</dd>
<dt id="template_method_pattern" class="glossary">Template Method pattern</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A <g key="design_pattern">design pattern</g> in which a <g key="parent_class">parent class</g> defines an overall sequence of operations by calling <g key="abstract_method">abstract methods</g> that <g key="child_class">child classes</g> must then implement. Each child class then behaves in the same general way, but implements the steps in different ways.</dd>
<dt id="topological_order" class="glossary">topological order</dt>
<dd class="glossary">Any ordering of the <g key="node">nodes</g> in a <g key="graph">graph</g> that respects the direction of its <g key="edge">edges</g>, i.e., if there is an edge from node A to node B, A comes before B in the ordering. There may be many topological orderings of a particular graph.</dd>
<dt id="utf_8" class="glossary">UTF-8</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A way to store the numeric codes representing Unicode characters in memory that is <g key="backward_compatible">backward-compatible</g> with the older <g key="ascii">ASCII</g> standard.</dd>
<dt id="visitor_pattern" class="glossary">Visitor pattern</dt>
<dd class="glossary">A <g key="design_pattern">design pattern</g> in which the operation to be done is taken to each element of a data structure in turn.  It is usually implemented by having a generator &quot;visitor&quot; that knows how to reach the structure's elements, and which is given a function or method to call for each in turn that carries out the specific operation.</dd>
<dt id="walk_tree" class="glossary">walk (a tree)</dt>
<dd class="glossary">To visit each <g key="node">node</g> in a <g key="tree">tree</g> in some order, typically <g key="depth_first">depth-first</g> or <g key="breadth_first">breadth-first</g>.</dd>
<dt id="yaml" class="glossary">YAML</dt>
<dd class="glossary">Short for &quot;YAML Ain't Markup Language&quot;, a way to represent nested data using indentation rather than the parentheses and commas of <g key="json">JSON</g>. YAML is often used in configuration files and to define parameters for various flavors of <g key="markdown">Markdown</g> documents.</dd>

</dl>
