---
title: "Glossary"
---

## A

<span id="absolute_error">absolute error</span>
:   The absolute value of the difference between the observed and the correct
    value. Absolute error is usually less useful than [relative
    error](#relative_error).

<span id="absolute_path">absolute path</span>
:   A path that points to the same location in the [filesystem](#filesystem)
    regardless of where it is evaluated. An absolute path is the equivalent
    of latitude and longitude in geography.

<span id="abstract_method">abstract method</span>
:   In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a [method](#method) that is defined
    but not implemented. Programmers will define an abstract method in a
    [parent class](#parent_class) to specify operations that [child
    classes](#child_class) must provide.

<span id="abstract_syntax_tree">abstract syntax tree</span> (AST)
:   A deeply nested data structure, or [tree](#tree), that represents the
    structure of a program. For example, the AST might have a [node](#node)
    representing a `while` loop with one [child](#child_tree) representing
    the loop condition and another representing the [loop body](#loop_body).

<span id="accidental_complexity">accidental complexity</span>
:   The extra (avoidable) complexity introduced by poor design choices. The term
    is used in contrast with [intrinsic complexity](#intrinsic_complexity).

<span id="accumulator">accumulator</span>
:   A variable that collects and/or combines many values.  For example, if a
    program sums the values in an array by adding them all to a variable
    called `result`, then `result` is the accumulator.

<span id="actual_result">actual result (of test)</span>
:   The value generated by running code in a test. If this matches the [expected
    result](#expected_result), the test [passes](#pass_test); if the two are
    different, the test [fails](#fail_test).

<span id="adapter_pattern">Adapter pattern</span>
:   A [design pattern](#design_pattern) that rearranges parameters, provides
    extra values, or does other work so that one function can be called by
    another.

<span id="alias">alias</span>
:   A second or subsequent reference to the same object. Aliases are useful, but
    increase the [cognitive load](#cognitive_load) on readers who have to
    remember that all these names refer to the same thing.

<span id="anonymous_function">anonymous function</span>
:   A function that has not been assigned a name. Anonymous functions are
    usually quite short, and are usually defined where they are used, e.g.,
    as callbacks. In Python, these are called lambda functions and are
    created through use of the lambda reserved word.

<span id="abi">Application Binary Interface</span> (ABI)
:   The low-level layout that a piece of software must have to work on a
    particular kind of machine.

<span id="api">Application Programming Interface</span> (API)
:   A set of functions provided by a software library or web service that other
    software can call.

<span id="argument">argument</span>
:   A value passed to a function when it is called.

<span id="ascii">ASCII</span>
:   A standard way to represent the characters commonly used in the Western
    European languages as 7- or 8-bit integers, now largely superceded by
    [Unicode](#unicode).

<span id="assembler">assembler</span>
:   A [compiler](#compiler) that translates software written in [assembly
    code](#assembly_code) into machine instructions.

<span id="assembly_code">assembly code</span>
:   A low-level programming language whose statements correspond closely to the
    actual [instruction set](#instruction_set) of a particular kind of
    processor.

<span id="assertion">assertion</span>
:   A [Boolean](#boolean) expression that must be true at a certain point in a
    program. Assertions may be built into the language (e.g., Python's
    `assert` statement) or provided as functions (as with Node's `assert`
    library).

<span id="associative_array">associative array</span>
:   See [dictionary](#dictionary).

<span id="asynchronous">asynchronous</span>
:   Not happening at the same time. In programming, an asynchronous operation is
    one that runs independently of another, or that starts at one time and
    ends at another.

<span id="attribute">attribute</span>
:   A name-value pair associated with an object, used to store metadata about
    the object such as an array's dimensions.

<span id="automatic_variable">automatic variable</span>
:   A variable that is automatically given a value in a [build
    rule](#build_rule). For example, Make automatically assigns the name of
    a rule's [target](#build_target) to the automatic variable `$@`.
    Automatic variables are frequently used when writing [pattern
    rules](#pattern_rule).

## B

<span id="backward_compatible">backward-compatible</span>
:   A property of a system that enables interoperability with an older legacy
    system, or with input designed for such a system.

<span id="bare_object">bare object</span>
:   An object that isn't an instance of any particular class.

<span id="base_class">base class</span>
:   In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a [class](#class) from which other
    classes are derived.

<span id="binary">binary</span>
:   A system which can have one of two possible states, often represented as 0
    and 1 or true and false.

<span id="bit">bit</span>
:   A single binary digit (0 or 1).

<span id="bitwise_operation">bitwise operation</span>
:   An operation that manipulates individual bits in memory. Common bitwise
    operations include `and`, `or`, `not`, and `xor`.

<span id="block_comment">block comment</span>
:   A [comment](#comment) that spans multiple lines. Block comments may be
    marked with special start and end symbols, like `/*` and `*/` in C and
    its descendents, or each line may be prefixed with a marker like `#`.

<span id="boolean">Boolean</span>
:   Relating to a variable or data type that can have either a logical value of
    true or false. Named for George Boole, a 19th century mathematician.

<span id="breadth_first">breadth first</span>
:   To go through a nested data structure such as a [tree](#tree) by exploring
    all of one level, then going on to the next level and so on, or to
    explore a problem by examining the first step of each possible solution,
    and then trying the next step for each.

<span id="breakpoint">breakpoint</span>
:   An instruction to a debugger telling it to suspend execution whenever a
    specific point in the program (such as a particular line) is reached.

<span id="bug">bug</span>
:   A missing or undesirable [feature](#feature_software) of a piece of
    software.

<span id="build_manager">build manager</span>
:   A program that keeps track of how files depend on one another and runs
    commands to update any files that are out-of-date. Build managers were
    invented to [compile](#compile) only those parts of programs that had
    changed, but are now often used to implement workflows in which plots
    depend on results files, which in turn depend on raw data files or
    configuration files.

<span id="build_recipe">build recipe</span>
:   The part of a [build rule](#build_rule) that describes how to update
    something that has fallen out-of-date.

<span id="build_rule">build rule</span>
:   A specification for a [build manager](#build_manager) that describes how
    some files depend on others and what to do if those files are out-of-
    date.

<span id="build_target">build target</span>
:   The file(s) that a [build rule](#build_rule) will update if they are out-of-
    date compared to their [dependencies](#dependency).

<span id="byte_code">byte code</span>
:   A set of instructions designed to be executed efficiently by an
    [interpreter](#interpreter).

## C

<span id="cache">cache</span>
:   Something that stores copies of data so that future requests for it can be
    satisfied more quickly. The CPU in a computer uses a hardware cache to
    hold recently-accessed values; many programs rely on a software cache to
    reduce network traffic and latency. Figuring out when something in a
    cache is out-of-date and should be replaced is one of the [two hard
    problems in computer science](#two_hard_problems).

<span id="caching">caching</span>
:   To save a copy of some data in a local [cache](#cache) to make future access
    faster.

<span id="call_stack">call stack</span>
:   A data structure that stores information about the active subroutines
    executed.

<span id="callback">callback function</span>
:   A function A that is passed to another function B so that B can call it at
    some later point. Callbacks can be used [synchronously](#synchronous),
    as in generic functions like `map` that invoke a callback function once
    for each element in a collection, or [asynchronously](#asynchronous), as
    in a [client](#client) that runs a callback when a
    [response](#http_response) is received in answer to a
    [request](#http_request).

<span id="css">Cascading Style Sheets</span> (CSS)
:   A way to control the appearance of HTML. CSS is typically used to specify
    fonts, colors, and layout.

<span id="catch_exception">catch (an exception)</span>
:   To handle an error or other unexpected event represented by an
    [exception](#exception).

<span id="chain_of_responsibility_pattern">Chain of Responsibility pattern</span>
:   A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which each [object](#object) either
    handles a request or passes it on to another object.

<span id="character_encoding">character encoding</span>
:   A specification of how characters are stored as bytes. The most commonly-
    used encoding today is [UTF-8](#utf_8).

<span id="child_tree">child (in a tree)</span>
:   A [node](#node) in a [tree](#tree) that is below another node (called the
    [parent](#parent_tree)).

<span id="child_class">child class</span>
:   In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a [class](#class) derived from
    another class (called the [parent class](#parent_class)).

<span id="circular_dependency">circular dependency</span>
:   A situation in which X depends on Y and Y depends on X, either directly or
    indirectly. If there is a circular dependency, then the [dependency
    graph](#dependency_graph) is not [acyclic](#dag).

<span id="class">class</span>
:   In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a structure that combines data and
    operations (called [methods](#method)). The program then uses a
    [constructor](#constructor) to create an [object](#object) with those
    properties and methods. Programmers generally put generic or reusable
    behavior in [parent classes](#parent_class), and more detailed or
    specific behavior in [child classes](#child_class).

<span id="client">client</span>
:   A program such as a web browser that gets data from a [server](#server) and
    displays it to, or interacts with, users. The term is used more
    generally to refer to any program A that makes requests of another
    program B. A single program can be both a client and a server.

<span id="closure">closure</span>
:   A set of variables defined in the same [scope](#scope) whose existence has
    been preserved after that scope has ended.

<span id="code_coverage">code coverage (in testing)</span>
:   How much of a [library](#library) or program is executed when tests run.
    This is normally reported as a percentage of lines of code.

<span id="cognitive_load">cognitive load</span>
:   The amount of working memory needed to accomplish a set of simultaneous
    tasks.

<span id="collision">collision</span>
:   A situation in which a program tries to store two items in the same location
    in memory. For example, a collision occurs when a [hash
    function](#hash_function) generates the same [hash code](#hash_code) for
    two different items.

<span id="column_major">column-major storage</span>
:   Storing each column of a two-dimensional array as one block of memory so
    that elements in the same row are far apart.

<span id="combinatorial_explosion">combinatorial explosion</span>
:   The exponential growth in the size of a problem or the time required to
    solve it that arises when all possible combinations of a set of items
    must be searched.

<span id="csv">comma-separated values</span> (CSV)
:   A text format for tabular data in which each [record](#record) is one row
    and [fields](#field) are separated by commas. There are many minor
    variations, particularly around quoting of [strings](#string).

<span id="command_line_argument">command-line argument</span>
:   A filename or control flag given to a command-line program when it is run.

<span id="cli">command-line interface</span> (CLI)
:   A user interface that relies solely on text for commands and output,
    typically running in a [shell](#shell).

<span id="comment">comment</span>
:   Text written in a script that is not treated as code to be run, but rather
    as text that describes what the code is doing. These are usually short
    notes, often beginning with a `#` (in many programming languages).

<span id="compile">compile</span>
:   To translate textual source into another form. Programs in [compiled
    languages](#compiled_language) are translated into machine instructions
    for a computer to run, and [Markdown](#markdown) is usually translated
    into [HTML](#html) for display.

<span id="compiled_language">compiled language</span>
:   Originally, a language such as C or Fortran that is translated into machine
    instructions for execution. Languages such as Java are also compiled
    before execution, but into [byte code](#byte_code) instead of machine
    instructions, while [interpreted languages](#interpreted_language) like
    JavaScript are compiled to byte code on the fly.

<span id="compiler">compiler</span>
:   An application that translates programs written in some languages into
    machine instructions or [byte code](#byte_code).

<span id="confirmation_bias">confirmation bias</span>
:   The tendency for someone to look for evidence that they are right rather
    than searching for reasons why they might be wrong.

<span id="console">console</span>
:   A computer terminal where a user may enter commands, or a program, such as a
    shell that simulates such a device.

<span id="constructor">constructor</span>
:   A function that creates an [object](#object) of a particular
    [class](#class).

<span id="utc">Coordinated Universal Time</span> (UTC)
:   The standard time against which all others are defined. UTC is the time at
    longitude 0°, and is not adjusted for daylight savings.
    [Timestamps](#timestamp) are often reported in UTC so that they will be
    the same no matter what timezone the computer is in.

<span id="corner_case">corner case</span>
:   Another name for an [edge case](#edge_case).

<span id="coupling">coupling</span>
:   The degree of interaction between two [classes](#class), [modules](#module),
    or other software components. If a system's components are [loosely
    coupled](#loosely_coupled), changes to one are unlikely to affect
    others.  If they are [tightly coupled](#tightly_coupled), then any
    change requires other changes elsewhere, which complicates maintenance
    and evolution.

<span id="cryptographic_hash_function">cryptographic hash function</span>
:   A [hash function](#hash_function) that produces an apparently-random value
    for any input.

<span id="current_working_directory">current working directory</span>
:   The [folder](#folder) or [directory](#directory) location in which the
    program operates. Any action taken by the program occurs relative to
    this directory.

<span id="cycle">cycle (in a graph)</span>
:   A set of links in a graph that leads from a node back to itself.

## D

<span id="data_frame">data frame</span>
:   A two-dimensional data structure for storing tabular data in memory. Rows
    represent [records](#record) and columns represent [fields](#field).

<span id="data_migration">data migration</span>
:   Moving data from one location or format to another. The term refers to
    translating data from an old format to a newer one.

<span id="decorator_pattern">Decorator pattern</span>
:   A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which a function adds additional
    features to another function or a [class](#class) after its initial
    definition. Decorators are a feature of Python and can be implemented in
    most other languages as well.

<span id="defensive_programming">defensive programming</span>
:   A set of programming practices that assumes mistakes will happen and either
    reports or corrects them, such as inserting [assertions](#assertion) to
    report situations that are not ever supposed to occur.

<span id="dependency">dependency</span>
:   See [prerequisite](#prerequisite).

<span id="dependency_graph">dependency graph</span>
:   A [directed graph](#directed_graph) showing how things depend on one
    another, such as the files to be updated by a [build
    manager](#build_manager). If the dependency graph is not
    [acyclic](#dag), the dependencies cannot be resolved.

<span id="deprecation">deprecation</span>
:   To indicate that while a function, method, or class exists, its use is no
    longer recommended (for example, because it is going to be phased out in
    a future release).

<span id="depth_first">depth-first</span>
:   A search algorithm that explores one possibility all the way to its
    conclusion before moving on to the next.

<span id="derived_class">derived class</span>
:   In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a class that is a direct or indirect
    extension of a [base class](#base_class).

<span id="design_by_contract">design by contract</span>
:   A style of designing software in which functions specify the [pre-
    conditions](#pre_condition) that must be true in order for them to run
    and the [post-conditions](#post_condition) they guarantee will be true
    when they return. A function can then be replaced by one with weaker
    pre-conditions (i.e., it accepts a wider set of input) and/or stronger
    post-conditions (i.e., it produces a smaller range of output) without
    breaking anything else.

<span id="design_pattern">design pattern</span>
:   A recurring pattern in software design that is specific enough to be worth
    naming, but not so specific that a single best implementation can be
    provided by a [library](#library).

<span id="destructuring_assignment">destructuring assignment</span>
:   Unpacking values from data structures and assigning them to multiple
    variables in a single statement.

<span id="dictionary">dictionary</span>
:   A data structure that allows items to be looked up by value, sometimes
    called an [associative array](#associative_array). Dictionaries are
    often implemented using [hash tables](#hash_table).

<span id="dag">directed acyclic graph</span> (DAG)
:   A [directed graph](#directed_graph) which does not contain any loops (i.e.,
    it is not possible to reach a [node](#node) from itself by following
    edges).

<span id="directed_graph">directed graph</span>
:   A [graph](#graph) whose [edges](#edge) have directions.

<span id="directory">directory</span>
:   A structure in a [filesystem](#filesystem) that contains references to other
    structures, such as files and other directories.

<span id="disassembler">disassembler</span>
:   A program that translates machine instructions into [assembly
    code](#assembly_code) or some other higher-level language.

<span id="doc_comment">doc comment</span>
:   A documentation comment ("doc comment" for short) is a specially-formatted
    comment containing documentation about a piece of code that is embedded
    in the code itself.

<span id="dom">Document Object Model</span> (DOM)
:   A standard, in-memory representation of [HTML](#html) and [XML](#xml). Each
    [element](#element) is stored as a [node](#node) in a [tree](#tree) with
    a set of named [attributes](#attribute); contained elements are [child
    nodes](#child_tree).

<span id="driver">driver</span>
:   A program that runs other programs, or a function that drives all of the
    other functions in a program.

<span id="dynamic_loading">dynamic loading</span>
:   To [import](#import) a [module](#module) into the memory of a program while
    it is already running. Most [interpreted
    languages](#interpreted_language) use dynamic loading, and provide tools
    so that programs can find and load modules dynamically to configure
    themselves.

<span id="dynamic_lookup">dynamic lookup</span>
:   To find a function or a property of an [object](#object) by name while a
    program is running. For example, instead of getting a specific property
    of an object using `obj.name`, a program might use `obj[someVariable]`,
    where `someVariable` could hold `"name"` or some other property name.

<span id="dynamic_scoping">dynamic scoping</span>
:   To find the value of a variable by looking at what is on the [call
    stack](#call_stack) at the moment the lookup is done. Almost all
    programming languages use [lexical-scoping](#lexical_scoping) instead,
    since it is more predictable.

## E

<span id="eager_matching">eager matching</span>
:   Matching as much as possible, as early as possible.

<span id="easy_mode">easy mode</span>
:   A term borrowed from gaming meaning to do something with obstacles or
    difficulties simplified or removed, often for practice purposes.

<span id="edge">edge</span>
:   A connection between two [nodes](#node) in a [graph](#graph). An edge may
    have data associated with it, such as a name or distance.

<span id="edge_case">edge case</span>
:   A problem that only comes up under unusual circumstances or when a system is
    pushed to its limits; also sometimes called a [corner
    case](#corner_case). Programs intended for widespread use have to handle
    edge cases, but doing so can make them much more complicated.

<span id="element">element</span>
:   A named component in an [HTML](#html) or [XML](#xml) document. Elements are
    usually written `<name>`…`</name>`, where "…" represents the content of
    the element. Elements often have [attributes](#attribute).

<span id="encapsulate">encapsulate</span>
:   To store data inside some kind of structure so that it is only accessible
    through that structure.

<span id="entry_point">entry point</span>
:   Where a program begins executing.

<span id="environment">environment</span>
:   A structure that stores a set of variable names and the values they refer
    to.

<span id="error_test">error (in a test)</span>
:   Signalled when something goes wrong in a [unit test](#unit_test) itself
    rather than in the system being tested. In this case, we do not know
    anything about the correctness of the system.

<span id="error_handling">error handling</span>
:   What a program does to detect and correct for errors. Examples include
    printing a message and using a default configuration if the user-
    specified configuration cannot be found.

<span id="event_loop">event loop</span>
:   A mechanism for managing concurrent activities in a program. Tasks are
    represented as items in a queue; the event loop repeatedly takes an item
    from the front of the queue and runs it, adding any other tasks it
    generates to the back of the queue to run later.

<span id="exception">exception</span>
:   An object that stores information about an error or other unusual event in a
    program. One part of a program will create and [raise an
    exception](#raise_exception) to signal that something unexpected has
    happened; another part will [catch](#catch_exception) it.

<span id="exception_handler">exception handler</span>
:   A piece of code that deals with an [exception](#exception) after it is
    [caught](#catch_exception), e.g., by recording a message, retrying the
    operation that failed, or performing an alternate operation.

<span id="expected_result">expected result (of test)</span>
:   The value that a piece of software is supposed to produce when tested in a
    certain way, or the state in which it is supposed to leave the system.

<span id="exploratory_programming">exploratory programming</span>
:   A software development methodology in which requirements emerge or change as
    the software is being written, often in response to results from early
    runs.

<span id="export">export</span>
:   To make something visible outside a [module](#module) so that other parts of
    a program can [import](#import) it. In most languages a module must
    export things explicitly in an attempt to avoid [name
    collision](#name_collision).

## F

<span id="fail_test">fail (a test)</span>
:   A test fails if the [actual result](#actual_result) does not match the
    [expected result](#expected_result).

<span id="feature_software">feature (in software)</span>
:   Some aspect of software that was deliberately designed or built. A
    [bug](#bug) is an undesired feature.

<span id="field">field</span>
:   A component of a [record](#record) containing a single value. Every record
    in a database [table](#table) has the same fields.

<span id="filename_extension">filename extension</span>
:   The last part of a filename, usually following the '.' symbol. Filename
    extensions are commonly used to indicate the type of content in the
    file, though there is no guarantee that this is correct.

<span id="filesystem">filesystem</span>
:   The part of the [operating system](#operating_system) that manages how files
    are stored and retrieved. Also used to refer to all of those files and
    [directories](#directory) or the specific way they are stored (as in
    "the Unix filesystem").

<span id="filter">filter</span>
:   As a verb, to choose a set of [records](#record) (i.e., rows of a table)
    based on the values they contain. As a noun, a command-line program that
    reads lines of text from files or [standard input](#stdin), performs
    some operation on them (such as filtering), and writes to a file or
    [stdout](#stdout).

<span id="fsm">finite state machine</span> (FSM)
:   A theoretical model of computing consisting of a directed graph whose nodes
    represent the states of the computation and whose arcs show how to move
    from one state to another. Every [regular
    expression](#regular_expression) corresponds to a finite state machine.

<span id="fixed_width_string">fixed-width (of strings)</span>
:   A set of character strings that have the same length. Databases often used
    fixed-width strings to make storage and access more efficient; short
    strings are [padded](#pad_string) up to the required length and long
    strings are truncated.

<span id="fixture">fixture</span>
:   The thing on which a test is run, such as the [parameters](#parameter) to
    the function being tested or the file being processed.

<span id="fluent_interface">fluent interface</span>
:   A style of object-oriented programming in which methods return objects so
    that other methods can immediately be called.

<span id="folder">folder</span>
:   Another term for a [directory](#directory).

## G

<span id="garbage_collection">garbage collection</span>
:   The process of identifying memory that has been allocated but is no longer
    in use and reclaiming it to be re-used.

<span id="generator_function">generator function</span>
:   A function whose state is automatically saved when it returns a value so
    that execution can be restarted from that point the next time it is
    called. One example of generator functions use is to produce streams of
    values that can be processed by `for` loops.

<span id="generic_function">generic function</span>
:   A collection of functions with similar purpose, each operating on a
    different class of data.

<span id="global_variable">global variable</span>
:   A variable defined outside any particular function or [package](#package)
    namespace, which is therefore visible to all functions.

<span id="globbing">globbing</span>
:   To specify a set of filenames using a simplified form of [regular
    expressions](#regular_expression), such as `*.dat` to mean "all files
    whose names end in `.dat`". The name is derived from "global".

<span id="graph">graph</span>
:   A plot or a chart that displays data, or a data structure in which
    [nodes](#node) are connected to one another by [edges](#edge).

<span id="greedy_algorithm">greedy algorithm</span>
:   An algorithm that consumes as much input as possible, as early as possible.

## H

<span id="handler">handler</span>
:   A [callback function](#callback) responsible for handling some particular
    event, such as the user clicking on a button or new data being receiving
    from a file.

<span id="hash_code">hash code</span>
:   A value generated by a [hash function](#hash_function). Good hash codes have
    the same properties as random numbers in order to reduce the frequency
    of [collisions](#collision).

<span id="hash_function">hash function</span>
:   A function that turns arbitrary data into a bit array, or a [key](#key), of
    a fixed size. Hash functions are used to determine where data should be
    stored in a [hash table](#hash_table).

<span id="hash_table">hash table</span>
:   A data structure that calculates a pseudo-random key (location) for each
    value passed to it and stores the value in that location. Hash tables
    enable fast lookup for arbitrary data. This occurs at the cost of extra
    memory because hash tables must always be larger than the amount of
    information they need to store, to avoid the possibility of data
    collisions, when the hash function returns the same key for two
    different values.

<span id="header_file">header file</span>
:   In C and C++, a file that defines constants and function
    [signatures](#signature) but does not contain runnable code. Header
    files tell the including file what is defined in other files so that the
    compiler can generate correct code.

<span id="heterogeneous">heterogeneous</span>
:   Containing mixed data types. For example, an array in Javascript can contain
    a mix of numbers, character strings, and values of other types.

<span id="heuristic">heuristic</span>
:   A rule or guideline that isn't guaranteed to produce the desired result, but
    usually does.

<span id="homogeneous">homogeneous</span>
:   Containing a single data type. For example, a [vector](#vector) must be
    homogeneous: its values must all be numeric, logical, etc.

<span id="http_request">HTTP request</span>
:   A message sent from a [client](#client) to a [server](#server) using the
    [HTTP](#http) [protocol](#protocol) asking for data. A request usually
    asks for a web page, image, or other data.

<span id="http_response">HTTP response</span>
:   A reply sent from a [server](#server) to a [client](#client) using the
    [HTTP](#http) [protocol](#protocol) in response to a
    [request](#http_request). The response usually contains a web page,
    image, or data.

<span id="html">HyperText Markup Language</span> (HTML)
:   The standard [markup language](#markup_language) used for web pages. HTML is
    represented in memory using [DOM](#dom) (Digital Object Model).

<span id="http">HyperText Transfer Protocol</span> (HTTP)
:   The standard [protocol](#protocol) for data transfer on the World-Wide Web.
    HTTP defines the format of [requests](#http_request) and
    [responses](#http_response), the meanings of standard error codes, and
    other features.

## I

<span id="idiomatic">idiomatic</span>
:   To use a language in the same way as a fluent or native speaker. Programs
    are called idiomatic if they use the language the way that proficient
    programmers use it.

<span id="iife">immediately-invoked function expression</span> (IIFE)
:   A function that is invoked once at the point where it is defined.  IIFEs are
    typically used to create a [scope](#scope) to hide some function or
    variable definitions.

<span id="immutable">immutable</span>
:   Data that cannot be changed after being created. Immutable data is easier to
    think about, particularly if data structures are shared between several
    tasks, but may result in higher memory requirements.

<span id="import">import</span>
:   To bring things from a [module](#module) into a program for use. In most
    languages a program can only import things that the module explicitly
    [exports](#export).

<span id="index_database">index (in a database)</span>
:   An auxiliary data structure in a database used to speed up search for some
    entries. An index increases memory and disk requirements but reduces
    search time.

<span id="inner_function">inner function</span>
:   A function defined inside another (outer) function.  Creating and returning
    inner functions is a way to create [closures](#closure).

<span id="instance">instance</span>
:   An [object](#object) of a particular [class](#class).

<span id="instruction_pointer">instruction pointer</span>
:   A special [register](#register) in a processor that stores the address of
    the next instruction to execute.

<span id="instruction_set">instruction set</span>
:   The basic operations that a particular processor can execute directly.

<span id="interpreted_language">interpreted language</span>
:   A high-level language that is not executed directly by the computer, but
    instead is run by an [interpreter](#interpreter) that translates program
    instructions into machine commands on the fly.

<span id="interpreter">interpreter</span>
:   A program whose job it is to run programs written in a high-level
    [interpreted language](#interpreted_language). Interpreters can run
    interactively, but may also execute commands saved in a file.

<span id="intrinsic_complexity">intrinsic complexity</span>
:   The unavoidable complexity inherent in a problem that any solution must deal
    with. The term is used in contrast with [accidental
    complexity](#accidental_complexity).

<span id="introspection">introspection</span>
:   Having a program examine itself as it is running; common examples are to
    determine the specific class of a generic object or to get the fields of
    an object when they are not known in advance.

<span id="iso_date_format">ISO date format</span>
:   An international standard for formatting dates. While the full standard is
    complex, the most common form is `YYYY-MM-DD`, i.e., a four-digit year,
    a two-digit month, and a two-digit day, separated by hyphens.

<span id="iterator_pattern">Iterator pattern</span>
:   A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which a temporary [object](#object)
    or [generator function](#generator_function) produces each value from a
    collection in turn for processing. This pattern hides the differences
    between different kinds of data structures so that everything can be
    processed using loops.

## J

<span id="json">JavaScript Object Notation</span> (JSON)
:   A way to represent data by combining basic values like numbers and character
    strings in [lists](#list) and [key/value](#dictionary) structures. The
    acronym stands for "JavaScript Object Notation"; unlike better-defined
    standards like [XML](#xml), it is unencumbered by a syntax for comments
    or ways to define a [schema](#schema).

<span id="join">join</span>
:   An operation that combines two [tables](#table), typically by matching
    [keys](#key) from one with keys from another.

## K

<span id="key">key</span>
:   A [field](#field) or combination of fields whose value(s) uniquely identify
    a [record](#record) within a [table](#table) or dataset. Keys are often
    used to select specific records and in [joins](#join).

## L

<span id="label_address">label (address in memory)</span>
:   A human-readable name given to a particular location in memory when writing
    programs in [assembly code](#assembly_code).

<span id="layout_engine">layout engine</span>
:   A piece of software that decides where to place text, images, and other
    elements on a page.

<span id="lazy_matching">lazy matching</span>
:   Matching as little as possible while still finding a valid match.

<span id="lru_cache">Least Recently Used cache</span> (LRU cache)
:   A [cache](#cache) that discards items that have not been used recently in
    order to limit memory requirements.

<span id="lexical_scoping">lexical scoping</span>
:   To look up the value associated with a name according to the textual
    structure of a program. Most programming languages use lexical scoping
    instead of [dynamic scoping](#dynamic_scoping) because the latter is
    less predictable.

<span id="library">library</span>
:   An installable collection of software, also often called a [module](#module)
    or [package](#package).

<span id="lifecycle">lifecycle</span>
:   The steps that something is allowed or required to go through. The lifecycle
    of an [object](#object) runs from its [construction](#constructor)
    through the operations it can or must perform before it is destroyed.

<span id="line_comment">line comment</span>
:   A [comment](#comment) in a program that spans part of a single line, as
    opposed to a [block comment](#block_comment) that may span multiple
    lines.

<span id="link">link (a program)</span>
:   To combine separately [compiled](#compile) modules into a single runnable
    program.

<span id="linter">linter</span>
:   A program that checks for common problems in software, such as violations of
    indentation rules or variable naming conventions. The name comes from
    the first tool of its kind, called `lint`.

<span id="liskov_substitution_principle">Liskov Substitution Principle</span>
:   A design rule stating that it should be possible to replace objects in a
    program with objects of derived classes without breaking the program.
    [Design by contract](#design_by_contract) is intended to enforce this
    rule.

<span id="list">list</span>
:   A [vector](#vector) that can contain values of many different
    ([heterogeneous](#heterogeneous)) types.

<span id="literal">literal</span>
:   A representation of a fixed value in a program, such as the digits `123` for
    the number 123 or the characters `"abc"` for the string containing those
    three letters.

<span id="literate_programming">literate programming</span>
:   A programming paradigm that mixes prose and code so that explanations and
    instructions are side by side.

<span id="loader">loader</span>
:   A function whose job is to read files containing runnable code into memory
    and make that code available to the calling program.

<span id="local_variable">local variable</span>
:   A variable defined inside a function which is only visible within that
    function.

<span id="log_message">log message</span>
:   A status report or error message written to a file as a program runs.

<span id="loop_body">loop body</span>
:   The statement or statements executed by a loop.

<span id="loosely_coupled">loosely coupled</span>
:   Components in a software system are said to be loosely coupled if they are
    relatively independent of one another, i.e., if any one of them can be
    changed or replaced without others having to be altered as well.

## M

<span id="macro">macro</span>
:   Originally short for "macro-instruction", an instruction to translate some
    of the text into a program into other text before using it.

<span id="makefile">Makefile</span>
:   A configuration file for the original [build manager](#build_manager).

<span id="manifest">manifest</span>
:   A list that specifies the precise versions of a complete set of libraries or
    other software components.

<span id="markdown">Markdown</span>
:   A [markup language](#markup_language) with a simple syntax intended as a
    replacement for [HTML](#html).

<span id="markup_language">markup language</span>
:   A set of rules for annotating text to define its meaning or how it should be
    displayed. The markup is usually not displayed, but instead controls how
    the underlying text is interpreted or shown. [Markdown](#markdown) and
    [HTML](#html) are widely-used markup languages for web pages.

<span id="method">method</span>
:   An implementation of a [generic function](#generic_function) that handles
    objects of a specific class.

<span id="method_chaining">method chaining</span>
:   A style of object-oriented programming in which an object's methods return
    that object as their result so that another method can immediately be
    called, as in `obj.a().b().c()`.

<span id="mock_object">mock object</span>
:   A simplified replacement for part of a program whose behavior is easy to
    control and predict. Mock objects are used in [unit tests](#unit_test)
    to simulate databases, web services, and other complex systems.

<span id="module">module</span>
:   A reusable software [package](#package), also often called a
    [library](#library).

<span id="module_bundler">module bundler</span>
:   A program that finds all the dependencies of a set of source files and
    combines them into a single loadable file.

<span id="multi_threaded">multi-threaded</span>
:   Capable of performing several operations simultaneously. Multi-threaded
    programs are usually more efficient than [single-
    threaded](#single_threaded) ones, but also harder to understand and
    debug.

## N

<span id="name_collision">name collision</span>
:   The ambiguity that arises when two or more things in a program that have the
    same name are active at the same time. Most languages use
    [namespaces](#namespace) to prevent such collisions.

<span id="namespace">namespace</span>
:   A collection of names in a program that exists in isolation from other
    namespaces. Each function, [object](#object), [class](#class), or
    [module](#module) in a program typically has its own namespace so that
    references to "X" in one part of a program do not accidentally refer to
    something called "X" in another part of the program. Scope is a
    distinct, but related, concept.

<span id="nested_function">nested function</span>
:   A function that is defined inside another function.

<span id="node">node</span>
:   An element of a [graph](#graph) that is connected to other nodes by
    [edges](#edge). Nodes typically have data associated with them, such as
    names or weights.

<span id="non_blocking_execution">non-blocking execution</span>
:   To allow a program to continue running while an operation is in progress.
    For example, many systems support non-blocking execution for file I/O so
    that the program can continue doing work while it waits for data to be
    read from or written to the [filesystem](#filesystem) (which is
    typically much slower than the CPU).

## O

<span id="object">object</span>
:   In [object-oriented programming](#oop), a structure that contains the data
    for a specific instance of a [class](#class). The operations the object
    is capable of are defined by the class's [methods](#method).

<span id="oop">object-oriented programming</span> (OOP)
:   A style of programming in which functions and data are bound together in
    [objects](#object) that only interact with each other through well-
    defined interfaces.

<span id="off_by_one_error">off-by-one error</span>
:   A common error in programming in which the program refers to element `i` of
    a structure when it should refer to element `i-1` or `i+1`, or processes
    `N` elements when it should process `N-1` or `N+1`.

<span id="op_code">op code</span>
:   The numerical code for a particular instruction that a processor can
    execute.

<span id="open_closed_principle">Open-Closed Principle</span>
:   A design rule stating that software should be open for extension but closed
    for modification, i.e., it should be possible to extend functionality
    without having to rewrite existing code.

<span id="operating_system">operating system</span>
:   A program that provides a standard interface to whatever hardware it is
    running on. Theoretically, any program that only interacts with the
    operating system should run on any computer that operating system runs
    on.

## P

<span id="package">package</span>
:   A collection of code, data, and documentation that can be distributed and
    re-used. Also referred to in some languages as a [library](#library) or
    [module](#module).

<span id="pad_string">pad (a string)</span>
:   To add extra characters to a string to make it a required length.

<span id="parameter">parameter</span>
:   A variable specified in a function definition that is assigned a value when
    the function is called.

<span id="parent_tree">parent (in a tree)</span>
:   A [node](#node) in a [tree](#node) that is above another node (called a
    [child](#child_tree)). Every node in a tree except the [root
    node](#root_tree) has a single parent.

<span id="parent_class">parent class</span>
:   In [object-oriented programming](#oop), the [class](#class) from which a sub
    class (called the [child class](#child_class)) is derived.

<span id="parser">parser</span>
:   A piece of software that translates a textual representation of something
    into a data structure. For example, a [YAML](#yaml) parser reads
    indented text and produces nested lists and objects.

<span id="pass_test">pass (a test)</span>
:   A test passes if the [actual result](#actual_result) matches the [expected
    result](#expected_result).

<span id="patch">patch</span>
:   A single file containing a set of changes to a set of files, separated by
    markers that indicate where each individual change should be applied.

<span id="path">path (in filesystem)</span>
:   A [string](#string) that specifies a location in a
    [filesystem](#filesystem). In Unix, the [directories](#directory) in a
    path are joined using `/`.

<span id="pattern_rule">pattern rule</span>
:   A generic [build rule](#build_rule) that describes how to update any file
    whose name matches a pattern. Pattern rules often use [automatic
    variables](#automatic_variable) to represent the actual filenames.

<span id="pipe">pipe</span>
:   To use the output of one computation as the input for the next, or the
    connection between the two computations responsible for the data
    transfer. Pipes were popularized by the [Unix shell](#shell), and are
    now used in many different programming languages and systems.

<span id="pipe_shell">pipe (in the Unix shell)</span>
:   The `|` used to make the output of one command the input of the next.

<span id="plugin_architecture">plugin architecture</span>
:   A style of application design in which the main program loads and runs small
    independent modules that do the bulk of the work.

<span id="polymorphism">polymorphism</span>
:   Having many different implementations of the same interface. If a set of
    functions or objects are polymorphic, they can be called
    interchangeably.

<span id="post_condition">post-condition</span>
:   Something that is guaranteed to be true after a function runs successfully.
    Post-conditions are often expressed as [assertions](#assertion) that are
    guaranteed to be true of a function's results.

<span id="pre_condition">pre-condition</span>
:   Something that must be true before a function runs in order for it to work
    correctly. Pre-conditions are often expressed as as
    [assertions](#assertion) that must be true of a function's inputs in
    order for it to run successfully.

<span id="precedence">precedence</span>
:   The priority of an operation. For example, multiplication has a higher
    precedence than addition, so `a+b*c` is read as "the sum of `a` with the
    product of `b` and `c`".

<span id="prerequisite">prerequisite</span>
:   Something that a [build target](#build_target) depends on.

<span id="process">process</span>
:   An [operating system](#operating_system)'s representation of a running
    program. A process typically has some memory, the identity of the user
    who is running it, and a set of connections to open files.

<span id="promise">promise</span>
:   A way to represent the result of a delayed or [asynchronous](#asynchronous)
    computation. A promise is a placeholder for a value that will eventually
    be computed; any attempt to read the value before it is available
    blocks, while any such attempt after the computation finishes acts like
    a normal read.

<span id="promisification">promisification</span>
:   In JavaScript, the act of wrapping a callback function in a
    [promise](#promise) for uniform asynchronous execution.

<span id="protocol">protocol</span>
:   Any standard specifying how two pieces of software interact. A network
    protocol such as [HTTP](#http) defines the messages that
    [clients](#client) and [servers](#server) exchange on the World-Wide
    Web; [object-oriented](#oop) programs often define protocols for
    interactions between [objects](#object) of different [classes](#class).

<span id="prune">prune</span>
:   To remove branches and nodes from a tree, or to rule out partially-complete
    solutions when searching for an overall solution in order to reduce
    work.

<span id="pseudo_random_number">pseudo-random number</span>
:   A value generated in a repeatable way that resembles the true randomness of
    the universe well enough to fool observers.

<span id="prng">pseudo-random number generator</span> (PRNG)
:   A function that can generate [pseudo-random numbers](#pseudo_random_number).

## Q

<span id="query_selector">query selector</span>
:   A pattern that specifies a set of [DOM](#dom) nodes.  Query selectors are
    used in [CSS](#css) to specify the elements that rules apply to, or by
    JavaScript programs to manipulate web pages.

<span id="query_string">query string</span>
:   The portion of a [URL](#url) after the question mark `?` that specifies
    extra parameters for the [HTTP request](#http_request) as name-value
    pairs.

## R

<span id="race_condition">race condition</span>
:   A situation in which a result depends on the order in which two or more
    concurrent operations are carried out.

<span id="raise_exception">raise (an exception)</span>
:   To signal that something unexpected or unusual has happened in a program by
    creating an [exception](#exception) and handing it to the [error-
    handling](#error_handling) system, which then tries to find a point in
    the program that will [catch](#catch_exception) it.

<span id="repl">read-eval-print loop</span> (REPL)
:   An interactive program that reads a command typed in by a user, executes it,
    prints the result, and then waits patiently for the next command. REPLs
    are often used to explore new ideas, or for debugging.

<span id="record">record</span>
:   A group of related values that are stored together. A record may be
    represented as a [tuple](#tuple) or as a row in a [table](#table); in
    the latter case, every record in the table has the same
    [fields](#field).

<span id="register">register</span>
:   A small piece of memory (typically one [word](#word_memory) long) built into
    a processor that operations can refer to directly.

<span id="regular_expression">regular expression</span>
:   A pattern for matching text, written as text itself. Regular expressions are
    sometimes called "regexp", "regex", or "RE", and are powerful tools for
    working with text.

<span id="relational_database">relational database</span>
:   A database that organizes information into [tables](#table), each of which
    has a fixed set of named [fields](#field) (shown as columns) and a
    variable number of [records](#record) (shown as rows).

<span id="relative_error">relative error</span>
:   The absolute value of the difference between the actual and correct value
    divided by the correct value. For example, if the actual value is 9 and
    the correct value is 10, the relative error is 0.1. Relative error is
    usually more useful than [absolute error](#absolute_error).

<span id="relative_path">relative path</span>
:   A path that is interpreted relative to some other location, such as the
    [current working directory](#current_working_directory). A relative path
    is the equivalent of giving directions using terms like "straight" and
    "left".

<span id="root_tree">root (in a tree)</span>
:   The [node](#node) in a [tree](#tree) of which all other nodes are direct or
    indirect [children](#child_tree), or equivalently the only node in the
    tree that has no [parent](#parent_tree).

<span id="row_major">row-major storage</span>
:   Storing each row of a two-dimensional array as one block of memory so that
    elements in the same column are far apart.

<span id="runnable_documentation">runnable documentation</span>
:   Statements about code that can be executed to check their correctness, such
    as [assertions](#assertion) or [type declarations](#type_declaration).

## S

<span id="sandbox">sandbox</span>
:   A testing environment that is separate from the production system, or an
    environment that is only allowed to perform a restricted set of
    operations for security reasons.

<span id="sat_solver">SAT solver</span>
:   A library or application that determines whether there is an assignment of
    true and false to a set of [Boolean](#boolean) variables that makes an
    expression true (i.e., that satisfies the expression).

<span id="schema">schema</span>
:   A specification of the format of a dataset, including the name, format, and
    content of each [table](#table).

<span id="scope">scope</span>
:   The portion of a program within which a definition can be seen and used.

<span id="scope_creep">scope creep</span>
:   Slow but steady increase in a project's goals after the project starts.

<span id="scoring_function">scoring function</span>
:   A function that measures or estimates how good a solution to a problem is.

<span id="search_path">search path</span>
:   The list of directories that a program searches to find something. For
    example, the Unix [shell](#shell) uses the search path stored in the
    `PATH` variable when trying to find a program whose name it has been
    given.

<span id="seed">seed</span>
:   A value used to initialize a [pseudo-random number generator](#prng).

<span id="semantic_versioning">semantic versioning</span>
:   A standard for identifying software releases. In the version identifier
    `major.minor.patch`, `major` changes when a new version of software is
    incompatible with old versions, `minor` changes when new features are
    added to an existing version, and `patch` changes when small
    [bugs](#bug) are fixed.

<span id="server">server</span>
:   Typically, a program such as a database manager or web server that provides
    data to a [client](#client) upon request.

<span id="sha_1">SHA-1 hash</span>
:   A [cryptographic hash function](#cryptographic_hash_function) that produces
    a 160-bit output.

<span id="shell">shell</span>
:   A [command-line interface](#cli) that allows a user to interact with the
    [operating system](#operating_system), such as Bash (for Unix and MacOS)
    or PowerShell (for Windows).

<span id="shell_variable">shell variable</span>
:   A variable set and used in the [Unix shell](#shell). Commonly-used shell
    variables include `HOME` (the user's home directory) and `PATH` (their
    [search path](#search_path)).

<span id="side_effect">side effect</span>
:   A change made by a function while it runs that is visible after the function
    finishes, such as modifying a [global variable](#global_variable) or
    writing to a file. Side effects make programs harder for people to
    understand, since the effects are not necessarily clear at the point in
    the program where the function is called.

<span id="signature">signature</span>
:   The set of parameters (with types or meaning) that characterize the calling
    interface of a function or set of functions. Two functions with the same
    signature can be called interchangeably.

<span id="single_threaded">single-threaded</span>
:   A model of program execution in which only one thing can happen at a time.
    Single-threaded execution is easier for people to understand, but less
    efficient than [multi-threaded](#multi_threaded) execution.

<span id="singleton">singleton</span>
:   A set with only one element, or a [class](#class) with only one
    [instance](#instance).

<span id="singleton_pattern">Singleton pattern</span>
:   A [design pattern](#design_pattern) that creates a [singleton](#singleton)
    [object](#object) to manage some resource or service, such as a database
    or [cache](#cache). In [object-oriented programming](#oop), the pattern
    is usually implemented by hiding the [constructor](#constructor) of the
    [class](#class) in some way so that it can only be called once.

<span id="slug">slug</span>
:   An abbreviated portion of a page's URL that uniquely identifies it. In the
    example `https://www.mysite.com/category/post-name`, the slug is `post-
    name`.

<span id="source_map">source map</span>
:   A table used to translate a piece of code back to the lines in the original
    source.

<span id="sparse_matrix">sparse matrix</span>
:   A matrix in which most of the values are zero (or some other value). Rather
    than storing many copies of the same values, programs will often use a
    special data structure that only stores the "interesting" values.

<span id="sql">SQL</span>
:   The language used for writing queries for a [relational
    database](#relational_database). The term was originally an acronym for
    Structured Query Language.

<span id="stack_frame">stack frame</span>
:   A section of the [call stack](#call_stack) that records details of a single
    call to a specific function.

<span id="build_stale">stale (in build)</span>
:   To be out-of-date compared to a [prerequisite](#prerequisite). A [build
    manager](#build_manager)'s job is to find and update things that are
    stale.

<span id="stderr">standard error</span>
:   A predefined communication channel for a [process](#process) typically used
    to report errors.

<span id="stdin">standard input</span>
:   A predefined communication channel for a [process](#process), typically used
    to read input from the keyboard or from the previous process in a
    [pipe](#pipe_shell).

<span id="stdout">standard output</span>
:   A predefined communication channel for a [process](#process), typically used
    to send output to the screen or to the next process in a
    [pipe](#pipe_shell).

<span id="static_site_generator">static site generator</span>
:   A software tool that creates HTML pages from templates and content.

<span id="stream">stream</span>
:   A sequential flow of data, such as the [bits](#bit) arriving across a
    network connection or the bytes read from a file.

<span id="streaming_api">streaming API</span>
:   An [API](#api) that processes data in chunks rather than needing to have all
    of it in memory at once. Streaming APIs usually require
    [handlers](#handler) for events such as "start of data", "next block",
    and "end of data".

<span id="string">string</span>
:   A block of text in a program. The term is short for "character string".

<span id="string_interpolation">string interpolation</span>
:   The process of inserting text corresponding to specified values into a
    [string](#string), usually to make output human-readable.

<span id="synchronous">synchronous</span>
:   To happen at the same time. In programming, synchronous operations are ones
    that have to run simultaneously, or complete at the same time.

## T

<span id="tab_completion">tab completion</span>
:   A technique implemented by most [REPLs](#repl), [shells](#shell), and
    programming editors that completes a command, variable name, filename,
    or other text when the TAB key is pressed.

<span id="table">table</span>
:   A set of [records](#record) in a [relational database](#relational_database)
    or [data frame](#data_frame).

<span id="tagged_data">tagged data</span>
:   A technique for storing data in a two-part structure, where one part
    identifies the type and the other part stores the bits making up the
    value.

<span id="template_method_pattern">Template Method pattern</span>
:   A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which a [parent class](#parent_class)
    defines an overall sequence of operations by calling [abstract
    methods](#abstract_method) that [child classes](#child_class) must then
    implement. Each child class then behaves in the same general way, but
    implements the steps differently.

<span id="test_harness">test harness</span>
:   A program written to test some other program or set of functions, typically
    to measure their performance.

<span id="test_runner">test runner</span>
:   A program that finds and runs software tests and reports their results.

<span id="test_subject">test subject</span>
:   The thing being tested, sometimes also called the system under test (SUT).

<span id="tdd">test-driven development</span> (TDD)
:   A programming practice in which tests are written before a new feature is
    added or a [bug](#bug) is fixed in order to clarify the goal.

<span id="throw_exception">throw (exception)</span>
:   Another term for [raising](#raise_exception) an exception.

<span id="tightly_coupled">tightly coupled</span>
:   Components in a software system are said to be tightly coupled if they
    depend on each other's internals, so that if one is altered then others
    have to be altered as well.

<span id="toctou">Time of check/time of use</span> (ToCToU)
:   A [race condition](#race_condition) in which a process checks the state of
    something and then operates on it, but some other process might alter
    that state between the check and the operation.

<span id="timestamp">timestamp</span>
:   A digital identifier showing the time at which something was created or
    accessed. Timestamps should use [ISO date format](#iso_date_format) for
    portability.

<span id="token">token</span>
:   An indivisible unit of text for a parser, such as a variable name or a
    number. Exactly what constitutes a token depends on the language.

<span id="topological_order">topological order</span>
:   Any ordering of the [nodes](#node) in a [graph](#graph) that respects the
    direction of its [edges](#edge), i.e., if there is an edge from node A
    to node B, A comes before B in the ordering. There may be many
    topological orderings of a particular graph.

<span id="transitive_closure">transitive closure</span>
:   The set of all [nodes](#node) in a [graph](#graph) that are reachable from a
    starting node, either directly or indirectly.

<span id="tree">tree</span>
:   A [graph](#graph) in which every node except the [root](#root_tree) has
    exactly one [parent](#parent_tree).

<span id="tuple">tuple</span>
:   A value that has a fixed number of parts, such as the three color components
    of a red-green-blue color specification.

<span id="turing_machine">Turing Machine</span>
:   A theoretical model of computation that manipulates symbols on an infinite
    tape according to a fixed table of rules. Any computation that can be
    expressed as an algorithm can be done by a Turing Machine.

<span id="two_hard_problems">two hard problems in computer science</span>
:   Refers to a quote by Phil Karlton: "There are only two hard problems in
    computer science—cache invalidation and naming things." Many variations
    add a third problem as a joke, such as [off-by-one
    errors](#off_by_one_error).

<span id="type_declaration">type declaration</span>
:   A statement in a program that a variable or value has a particular data
    type. Languages like Java require type declarations for all variables;
    they are optional in TypeScript and Python, and not allowed in pure
    JavaScript.

## U

<span id="unicode">Unicode</span>
:   A standard that defines numeric codes for many thousands of characters and
    symbols. Unicode does not define how those numbers are stored; that is
    done by standards like [UTF-8](#utf_8).

<span id="url">Uniform Resource Locator</span> (URL)
:   A unique address on the World-Wide Web. URLs originally identified web
    pages, but may also represent datasets or database queries, particularly
    if they include a [query string](#query_string).

<span id="unit_test">unit test</span>
:   A test that exercises one function or feature of a piece of software and
    produces [pass](#pass_test), [fail](#fail_test), or
    [error](#error_test).

<span id="utf_8">UTF-8</span>
:   A way to store the numeric codes representing [Unicode](#unicode) characters
    in memory that is [backward-compatible](#backward_compatible) with the
    older [ASCII](#ascii) standard.

## V

<span id="vector">vector</span>
:   A sequence of values, usually of [homogeneous](#homogeneous) type.

<span id="version_control_system">version control system</span>
:   A system for managing changes made to software during its development.

<span id="virtual_machine">virtual machine</span>
:   A program that pretends to be a computer. This may seem a bit redundant, but
    VMs are quick to create and start up, and changes made inside the
    virtual machine are contained within that VM so we can install new
    [packages](#package) or run a completely different operating system
    without affecting the underlying computer.

<span id="visitor_pattern">Visitor pattern</span>
:   A [design pattern](#design_pattern) in which the operation to be done is
    taken to each element of a data structure in turn. It is usually
    implemented by having a generator "visitor" that knows how to reach the
    structure's elements, which is given a function or method to call for
    each in turn, and that carries out the specific operation.

## W

<span id="walk_tree">walk (a tree)</span>
:   To visit each [node](#node) in a [tree](#tree) in some order, typically
    [depth-first](#depth_first) or [breadth-first](#breadth_first).

<span id="watchpoint">watchpoint</span>
:   An instruction for a debugger telling it to suspend execution whenever the
    value of a variable (or more generally an expression) changes.

<span id="well_formed">well formed</span>
:   A piece of text that obeys the rules of a formal grammar is said to be well
    formed.

<span id="word_memory">word (of memory)</span>
:   The unit of memory that a particular processor most naturally works with.
    While a byte is a fixed size (8 bits), a word may be 16, 32, or 64 bits
    long depending on the processor.

## X

<span id="xml">XML</span>
:   A set of rules for defining [HTML](#html)-like tags and using them to format
    documents (typically data). XML was popular in the early 2000s, but its
    complexity led many programmers to adopt [JSON](#json), instead.

## Y

<span id="yaml">YAML</span>
:   Short for "YAML Ain't Markup Language", a way to represent nested data using
    indentation rather than the parentheses and commas of [JSON](#json).
    YAML is often used in configuration files and to define
    [parameters](#parameter) for various flavors of [Markdown](#markdown)
    documents.

## Z

<span id="z_buffering">z-buffering</span>
:   A drawing method that keeps track of the depth of what lies "under" each
    pixel so that it displays whatever is nearest to the observer.

